Project Overview

  Over the past four weeks, students with a strong interest in STEM from all over
the country have participated in the pilot MIT Beaver Works Mini Grand Prix
Challenge. Teams learned the basics of the algorithms involved in autonomous
driving and used them to program RACECARs (Rapid Autonomous
Complex-Environment Competing Ackermann-steering Robots), culminating in a final
competition to demonstrate everything that was learned.

  2016 is the pilot year for this program. Dr. Bob Shin of Lincoln Laboratories
saw a need for an engineering and robotics summer program, and came up with the
idea for the MIT Beaver Works Summer Boot Camp. The program is based upon the
MIT class RSS (Robotic Science and Systems) and essentially compresses the
material of that course into a month long period. The amount of material covered
made for a rigorous pace and exciting program for all involved.

  Monday through Friday, program participants would work in the Daniel
Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory (MIT Building 33) from 9:00am to 5:00pm. Most
mornings started with a technical lecture to prepare students for the lab that
immediately followed. Every day right before lunch there was also a guest
seminar speaker, usually a STEM professional. On Tuesdays and Thursdays after
lunch Ms. Jane Connor would give a lecture on communication and teamwork. The
rest of the day would be devoted to more lab time.

  During the first week, the focus was on learning the basics of ROS, Linux, and
Python, and taking the first steps in applying these skills through basic
movement in our RACECARS. In the final challenge cars raced side by side
following either the left or right wall.

  The content during the second week primarily concerned with “blob detection,”
or, recognizing different colored sheets of paper and making decisions based on
the color, shape, or size of the blob. Groups utilized the RACECAR’s ZED camera
to capture images and used open CV to manipulate them. The week finished with a
difficult challenge in which cars had to detect a red or green blob, drive
towards it until they were a certain distance away, then, based on the color of
the blob, turn left or right and wall follow.

  The third week was originally supposed to cover localization and mapping, but
due to problems with software plans changed slightly. The technical lectures
still covered those topics, but the labs focused on more reactive navigation;
we programmed our cars to drive around a pen and avoid obstacles without use of
a map. In the final challenge, the RACECAR’s had to drive around autonomously
while detecting red, green, yellow, and blue blobs.

  Finally, in week four teams prepared for the final exhibition day. Teams were
to use code from every week to showcase what they learned. Race day consisted of
two technical challenges; the first was a “move and explore challenge” similar
to week three’s final task, and the second was “make the correct turn,” similar
to week two’s. In addition to these challenges. The cars had to complete three
time trials, one heat race against two other cars, and a final race with
all nine cars on the grand prix race track.

  By the end of the program, students had gained confidence in ROS, Python, and
Linux. In addition, participants gained valuable robotics experience and learned
about how to be successful when working in groups. The seminars from experts in
various STEM fields showed students the many directions one can go if he or she
is interested in engineering and technology, and it was truly an amazing
opportunity to get to hear all of them speak. The MIT Beaver Works Summer
Institute was an incredible opportunity that greatly benefited all who had the
privilege to attend.
